



CFRG                                                          A. Muffett
Internet-Draft                                       Security Researcher
Intended status: Informational                           8 November 2022
Expires: 12 May 2023


   A 'Duck Test' for End-to-End Secure, Encrypted Messenger Software
              draft-muffett-end-to-end-secure-messaging-04

Abstract

   This internet-draft describes a test which MAY be used, either singly
   or in association with further tests, to establish whether end-to-end
   secure, encrypted messenger software correctly exhibits behaviours
   that are commonly associated with those and related descriptions of
   messenger software.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 12 May 2023.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.




Muffett                    Expires 12 May 2023                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    e2esm                    November 2022


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Work in Progress  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.2.  Why CFRG? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.3.  Why a 'Duck Test'?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.4.  Why only 'Messenger Software'?  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  The 'Field Model' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  The 'Duck Test' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  'Learn Some Information'? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.3.  'Conditions and Exceptions' . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

1.  Introduction

1.1.  Work in Progress

   This document is a complete rewrite from the ground up; if you are
   interested in seeing contextual previous work, see the "draft-
   muffett-end-to-end-secure-messaging-04-abandoned" series.

1.2.  Why CFRG?

   The IRTF CFRG charter (https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/charter-irtf-
   cfrg/01/) says:

   |  The CFRG serves as a bridge between theory and practice, bringing
   |  new cryptographic techniques to the Internet community and
   |  promoting an understanding of the use and applicability of these
   |  mechanisms via Informational RFCs ... Our goal is to provide a
   |  forum for discussing and analyzing general cryptographic aspects
   |  of security protocols, and to offer guidance on the use of
   |  emerging mechanisms and new uses of existing mechanisms.

   This internet-draft proposes an informational RFC which assists
   understanding of the use and applicability of end-to-end secure,
   encrypted messenger software.  This is achieved via discussion and
   analysis of general cryptographic aspects of the security which such
   software commonly offers, thereby providing the reader with guidance
   regarding the use - especially fitness and choice - of such software.

   Hence this internet-draft is submitted to CFRG.

1.3.  Why a 'Duck Test'?

   There are efforts afoot to help a user determine whether some
   software 'looks' like end-to-end secure, encrypted messenger
   software.  Such determinations may require considerable information,
   discussion of nuance, and application of considerable judgement.



Muffett                    Expires 12 May 2023                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    e2esm                    November 2022


   By contrast, this internet-draft specifies a simple 'falsifiability'
   test using which a person may establish whether some software does
   not 'quack' in the way that end-to-end secure, encrypted messenger
   software is commonly expected.

   The described test is not intended to be complete; additional tests,
   checks and obligations may be brought to bear by people who wish to
   determine whether some software also offers other characteristics
   such as 'anonymity', or broader forms of 'metadata privacy'.

   If some software fails to satisfy the duck test, it will be deemed
   only to have failed the duck test, and nothing more excepting that by
   failing the duck test we can clearly state that the software fails to
   exhibit some commonly expected characteristics of end-to-end secure,
   encrypted messenger software.

1.4.  Why only 'Messenger Software'?

   This internet-draft is written for the test to be applied to end-to-
   end secure, encrypted messenger software.

   It may be that the concepts describe could be more broadly applied -
   for instance to other encrypted transport protocols - but the scale
   of adoption, invention, and discussion of messenger software demands
   a focused document which deals exclusively with the particular use-
   case, common features and foibles of end-to-end secure, encrypted
   messenger software.

   Future documents may explore the aspects of this duck test which are
   well-suited for other purposes.

2.  The 'Field Model'

   Several key sources on encryption and privacy (TK, TK, TK) observe
   using similar terms that in pre-industrial-revolution societies:

   |  All that was once necessary for two or more people to have a
   |  private conversation was for them to walk into a field - away from
   |  eavesdroppers - where they could simply talk...

   We refer to this as the 'field model' of secure communication, and
   observe several characteristics from which we derive the duck test:

   *  There is a 'speaker', who will be the 'first party', named 'Alice'
      ('A')

   *  There are 'listeners', who will be 'second parties', named 'Bob'
      ('B'), 'Carol' ('C'), 'Dave' ('D'), etc...



Muffett                    Expires 12 May 2023                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    e2esm                    November 2022


   *  The speaker, and the listeners which are visible to the speaker as
      standing 'within earshot' alongside her in the field, comprise the
      'participants' for a given message as uttered by the speaker

   *  Each message may have different 'participation', as Bob, Carol,
      and Dave variously arrive and depart, all being seen by Alice

   *  There is a 'field' or 'platform' ('P') for the conversation,
      acting as a 'third party', analogous to 'WhatsApp' or 'Signal' or
      other end-to-end secure, encrypted messenger software; the third
      party is inert ground and is incapable of comprehension of the
      conversation

   *  All other entities outside of these three sets, are 'fourth
      parties'

2.1.  The 'Duck Test'

   From the above we may define the duck test:

   |  Subject to a fixed set of conditions and exceptions: for any given
   |  message, if *any* entity that was not a 'participant' for that
   |  message *may* use partial or complete knowledge of the platform -
   |  including logs of past-sent and future-sent messages - to learn
   |  *some* information regarding that message's content, then the
   |  platform fails to satisfy the duck test

2.2.  'Learn Some Information'?

   The duck test pivots upon an entity which was not first- or second-
   party to a message, "learning some information" about that message.
   How much is "some information"?

   |  For the duck test we define "learning about a single bit of
   |  message content to greater than 50% certainty" as being sufficient
   |  information to have learned so as to cause failure of the test

   This condition extends beyond message content into some aspects of
   sensitive metadata - for instance zero (or very short) message
   lengths can leak single bits of message content to greater than 50%
   certainty, and therefore must be mitigated.

2.3.  'Conditions and Exceptions'

   ...






Muffett                    Expires 12 May 2023                  [Page 4]
